Strings, which are widely used in Java programming, are a sequence of characters. In the Java programming language, strings are objects.
The Java platform provides the String class to create and manipulate strings.
The most direct way to create a string is to write:
In this case, "Hello world!" is a string literal—a series of characters in your code that is enclosed in double quotes. Whenever it encounters a string literal in your code, the compiler creates a String object with its value—in this case, Hello world!.
As with any other object, you can create String objects by using the new keyword and a constructor. The String class has thirteen constructors that allow you to provide the initial value of the string using different sources, such as an array of characters:
The last line of this code snippet displays hello.
Methods used to obtain information about an object are known as accessor methods. One accessor method that you can use with strings is the length() method, which returns the number of characters contained in the string object. After the following two lines of code have been executed, len equals 17:
A palindrome is a word or sentence that is symmetric—it is spelled the same forward and backward, ignoring case and punctuation. Here is a short and inefficient program to reverse a palindrome string. It invokes the String method charAt(i), which returns the ith character in the string, counting from 0.
Running the program produces this output:
To accomplish the string reversal, the program had to convert the string to an array of characters (first for loop), reverse the array into a second array (second for loop), and then convert back to a string. The String class includes a method, getChars(), to convert a string, or a portion of a string, into an array of characters so we could replace the first for loop in the program above with
The String class includes a method for concatenating two strings:
This returns a new string that is string1 with string2 added to it at the end.
You can also use the concat() method with string literals, as in:
Strings are more commonly concatenated with the + operator, as in
which results in
The + operator is widely used in print statements. For example:
which prints
Such a concatenation can be a mixture of any objects. For each object that is not a String, its toString() method is called to convert it to a String.
Breaking strings between lines using the + concatenation operator is, once again, very common in print statements.
You have seen the use of the printf() and format() methods to print output with formatted numbers. The String class has an equivalent class method, format(), that returns a String object rather than a PrintStream object.
Using String's static format() method allows you to create a formatted string that you can reuse, as opposed to a one-time print statement. For example, instead of
you can write
Your use of this page and all the material on pages under "The Java Tutorials" banner is subject to these legal notices.
Copyright © 1995, 2015 Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
Problems with the examples? Try Compiling and Running the Examples: FAQs.
Complaints? Compliments? Suggestions? Give us your feedback.

